uni/English/Research proposal (w7, w8, w9)/Proporal parts 3 and 4 - OS (w9).md, before:


Previous lesson: [[Proposal parts 1 and 2 - AI (w8)]]

[[Proposal- Part 3 and 4 OS.docx]]
[[article2-OS.pdf]]

# TOPIC - Operating Systems

> Look at the pictures below and discuss the following questions

1. What do you know about the development of computer operating systems? 
	- There was a big jump in development
2. Can you name all the Windows OS’s?
	- XP
	- 95
	- 98
	- Vista
	- 2000
	- ME
	- 7
	- 8
	- 8.1
	- 10
	- 11
1. Why do some people prefer various types of mobile operating systems?
	- User experience
	- Security
	- Customization
1. Which OS’s are the most secure? Why is that?
	- None (Android without Google)
2. Which operating systems are most popular in the field of various ‘smart home devices’?
	- Tizen
	- Linux
	- Android TV
	- No os at all
	- Fire TV 

# Academic Article - Comparison of Mobile Operating Systems

1.  Who are the Authors of the article?
	- Ovidiu Constantin Novac 
	- Mihaela Novac
	- Cornelia Gordan
	- Tamas Berczes 
	- Gyöngyi Bujdosó

2. What is the general topic of the article?
	- Comparative study of the most used three operating systems for mobile devices

3. What year and where was the article published?
	- 2017 14th International Conference on Engineering of Modern Electric Systems (EMES)

4. What is the aim of this study? (Abstract)
	- Compare most used operation systems on mobile, analyze advantages and disadvantages

5. What is the rationale for the article?
	- Show advantages, compare, describe the internal workings

6. Find sources from the article: what do they tell us about the topic background?
    - *Stallings*: An operating system has the following main objectives: execute user programs and facilitate troubleshooting for users, make the computing system easy to use, use the hardware efficiently
    - *Robert*: GUI interfaces
    - *Love*: Android is based on Linux and may be considered a variant of embedded Linux
	 - 25, Android version history: Each version of Android developed a code name based on desserts
	 - *Mauerer*: Google virtual machine, called Dalvik, and the Linux features are not accessible to users

7. What do the authors hope to do after conducting their research / what do they hope their research will help with? (Conclusion/Contribution)
	- Evaluate the reasons for popularity


# Part 3 - Data Collection

There are four main functions of this paragraph.
    • Participants
    • Methodology 
    • Data types
    • Ethics

## Using the following thesis statement and research questions, complete part 3 using the prompts to help you.

The aim of the proposed study is to find out whether there are generational differences in Mobile OS preferences in Lithuania, and what some of the reasons for this may be.

- The focus of the research is represented in the following questions:
	1. What is the reason you chose your current mobile device?
	2. What are some of the benefits of each major mobile OS (Android, IOS, Windows, Blackberry)
	3. What is a major drawback of each major mobile OS (Android, IOS, Windows, Blackberry)
	4. What does your generation feel is the most important aspect of a mobile device?

- **Participants** - who you are going to ask
    • In order to answer the research questions mentioned above, the following data will be collected from *citizens of Lithuania*
    • The research will consist of an interview with one or two representatives from the *different age groups*

- **Methodology** - what you are going to do
    • There will be four *polls / interviews / sections / questionnaires* where the participants will be asked 10 open questions which relate to each research questions *topics*.
    • The interviews will be held face to face or online, and will be recorded and transcribed. It will be a one-time interview which is expected to take approximately one hour and the *questions will focus on the benefits of each major mobile OS*
    • Closed questionnaires will be given to participants of the final two interviews in order to answer *closed questions/the aforementioned questions*

- **Data Types** - what kind of data you will find
    • The *interviews* are going to yield *qualitative* data, whereas *quantitative* data will be collected from the *polls / closed questions / surveys / questionnaires* therefore this study will employ a mixed methods design

- **Ethics** - do you need permission?
    • Because I will be asking *children / teens* there will be ethical issues, therefore *I need the consent from their parents*

# Part 4 - Data Analysis

There are three main functions of this paragraph.
	• Qualitative data analysis details
	• Quantitative data analysis details
	• Sharing of Results

## Complete the paragraph below with your own ideas

*Qualitative* data will be analysed by identifying and describing how the participants answer the asked open questions during the *interviews* and what points are raised *in the focus groups/discussions/during feedback*. The personal views of the participants will be known, which will help to understand the current situation *in regard of mobile OSes* in relation to the research questions. Opinions, similarities and differences will be elicited from the transcriptions in order to find patterns. Further *Quantitative* data will be collected anonymously and analysed through SPSS. This data will be presented as graphs showing the preferences of various generations when it comes to answering the research questions The research findings will be shared with the colleagues in the Faculty of *Fundamental sciences*.

Commit message:

vault sync: 2023-04-20 14:11:12
Affected files:
.obsidian/graph.json
.obsidian/plugins/obsidian-universal-renderer
uni/English/Research proposal (w7, w8, w9)/Proporal parts 3 and 4 - OS (w9).md
uni/English/Research proposal (w7, w8, w9)/Proposal part 5 - Cloud Computing (w10).md
uni/English/Research proposal (w7, w8, w9)/attachements/Proposal- Part 5 CloudComp.docx
uni/English/Research proposal (w7, w8, w9)/attachements/article3-cloud-computing.pdf

uni/English/Research proposal (w7, w8, w9)/Proporal parts 3 and 4 - OS (w9).md, after:


Previous lesson: [[Proposal parts 1 and 2 - AI (w8)]]

[[Proposal- Part 3 and 4 OS.docx]]
[[article2-OS.pdf]]

# TOPIC - Operating Systems

> Look at the pictures below and discuss the following questions

1. ? What do you know about the development of computer operating systems? 
	- There was a big jump in development
2. ? Can you name all the Windows OS’s?
	- XP
	- 95
	- 98
	- Vista
	- 2000
	- ME
	- 7
	- 8
	- 8.1
	- 10
	- 11
3. ? Why do some people prefer various types of mobile operating systems?
	- User experience
	- Security
	- Customization
4. ? Which OS’s are the most secure? Why is that?
	- None (Android without Google)
5. ? Which operating systems are most popular in the field of various ‘smart home devices’?
	- Tizen
	- Linux
	- Android TV
	- No os at all
	- Fire TV 

# Academic Article - Comparison of Mobile Operating Systems

1. ? Who are the Authors of the article?
	- Ovidiu Constantin Novac 
	- Mihaela Novac
	- Cornelia Gordan
	- Tamas Berczes 
	- Gyöngyi Bujdosó

2. ? What is the general topic of the article?
	- Comparative study of the most used three operating systems for mobile devices

3. ? What year and where was the article published?
	- 2017 14th International Conference on Engineering of Modern Electric Systems (EMES)

4. ? What is the aim of this study? (Abstract)
	- Compare most used operation systems on mobile, analyze advantages and disadvantages

5. ? What is the rationale for the article?
	- Show advantages, compare, describe the internal workings

6. ? Find sources from the article: what do they tell us about the topic background?
    - *Stallings*: An operating system has the following main objectives: execute user programs and facilitate troubleshooting for users, make the computing system easy to use, use the hardware efficiently
    - *Robert*: GUI interfaces
    - *Love*: Android is based on Linux and may be considered a variant of embedded Linux
	 - 25, Android version history: Each version of Android developed a code name based on desserts
	 - *Mauerer*: Google virtual machine, called Dalvik, and the Linux features are not accessible to users

7. ? What do the authors hope to do after conducting their research / what do they hope their research will help with? (Conclusion/Contribution)
	- Evaluate the reasons for popularity


# Part 3 - Data Collection

There are four main functions of this paragraph.
    • Participants
    • Methodology 
    • Data types
    • Ethics

## Using the following thesis statement and research questions, complete part 3 using the prompts to help you.

The aim of the proposed study is to find out whether there are generational differences in Mobile OS preferences in Lithuania, and what some of the reasons for this may be.

- The focus of the research is represented in the following questions:
	1. What is the reason you chose your current mobile device?
	2. What are some of the benefits of each major mobile OS (Android, IOS, Windows, Blackberry)
	3. What is a major drawback of each major mobile OS (Android, IOS, Windows, Blackberry)
	4. What does your generation feel is the most important aspect of a mobile device?

- **Participants** - who you are going to ask
    • In order to answer the research questions mentioned above, the following data will be collected from *citizens of Lithuania*
    • The research will consist of an interview with one or two representatives from the *different age groups*

- **Methodology** - what you are going to do
    • There will be four *polls / interviews / sections / questionnaires* where the participants will be asked 10 open questions which relate to each research questions *topics*.
    • The interviews will be held face to face or online, and will be recorded and transcribed. It will be a one-time interview which is expected to take approximately one hour and the *questions will focus on the benefits of each major mobile OS*
    • Closed questionnaires will be given to participants of the final two interviews in order to answer *closed questions/the aforementioned questions*

- **Data Types** - what kind of data you will find
    • The *interviews* are going to yield *qualitative* data, whereas *quantitative* data will be collected from the *polls / closed questions / surveys / questionnaires* therefore this study will employ a mixed methods design

- **Ethics** - do you need permission?
    • Because I will be asking *children / teens* there will be ethical issues, therefore *I need the consent from their parents*

# Part 4 - Data Analysis

There are three main functions of this paragraph.
	• Qualitative data analysis details
	• Quantitative data analysis details
	• Sharing of Results

## Complete the paragraph below with your own ideas

*Qualitative* data will be analysed by identifying and describing how the participants answer the asked open questions during the *interviews* and what points are raised *in the focus groups/discussions/during feedback*. The personal views of the participants will be known, which will help to understand the current situation *in regard of mobile OSes* in relation to the research questions. Opinions, similarities and differences will be elicited from the transcriptions in order to find patterns. Further *Quantitative* data will be collected anonymously and analysed through SPSS. This data will be presented as graphs showing the preferences of various generations when it comes to answering the research questions The research findings will be shared with the colleagues in the Faculty of *Fundamental sciences*.

Next lesson: [[Proposal part 5 - Cloud Computing (w10)]]
