# Cheating is risky for business students

Unfortunately, cheating has become more common at business schools. Between 2002 and 2004, Rutgers Business School professor Don McCabe surveyed 5,000 graduate students and dis- covered that MBA students confessed to cheating more than their nonbusiness peers. In fact, the managing director of the MBA pro- gram at Pennsylvania State University’s Smeal College of Business claims that recycled essays are the school’s most serious problem.

However, it is becoming much more difficult to fool admissions staff and instructors. To combat the increasing reliance on recycled essays and papers, a growing number of schools use plagiarism-detection software such as Turnitin (www.turnitin.com). For years, classroom instructors have employed Turnitin, which crawls the Web to identify plagiarized passages on term papers. Today, essays submitted through online admission portals at business schools are passed through Turnitin as well. The software has matched material to Wikipedia and Bloomberg Business- Week, among many other sites. Turnitin’s database also includes academic research papers and a growing repository of college papers. The software issues an alert when substantial parts of an essay match an entry by a different author stored in the system.

Smeal College provides an excellent illustration of this process. Since the school began to use Turnitin in 2010, it has rejected 85 applicants for plagiarizing their admissions essays, including 40 in 2013 alone. Overall, the number of MBA admissions offices using Turnitin continues to increase now that the tool is being marketed as an add-on to a widely used software suite (see www.iparadigms.com) for processing applications. Significantly, Turnitin keeps its client roster private, and most business schools do not disclose whether they are using the service, either for appli- cations or for term papers. Among those that do, Smeal College is the only one that has notified suspected plagiarizers. All other schools have rejected applicants without offering any explanation. Wordprom’s CEO maintains that its Web site is intended to give applicants samples of effective work so that they can get a feel for structure and style when drafting original essays. The site does warn users that it has an agreement to provide Turnitin with access to its database.

Some experts contend that tools like Turnitin are a deterrent but not a cure, because applicants can still hire someone to write their essays for them. Moreover, even cheaters are turning to con- tent-tracking services such as Turnitin. They want to make certain that the authors they hire to write their essays are not plagiarizing themselves or selling the essays to multiple customers.

A Ukraine-based competitor of Turnitin, Plagtracker (www.plagtracker.com), reports that its client base is growing rapidly. The site claims that 60 percent of its customers are either students or prospective students.


## Sources:

Compiled from “Turnitin Spring Webcasts Focus on Strategies for Educators to Improve Student Outcomes,” Turnitin Press Release, January 27, 2015; C. Straumsheim, “Turnitin Put to the Test,” Inside Higher Ed, February 6, 2014; J. Bailey, “New Turnitin Study on the Impact of Plagiarism Detection in Higher Education,” Plagiarism Today, February 5, 2014; M. Saltzman, “Turnitin: Plagiarizing Students Beware New App for iPad,” USA Today, September 17, 2013; E. Zlomek, “Master’s in Plagiarism,” Bloomberg BusinessWeek, April 22–28, 2013; N. Heckler, M. Rice, and C. Bryan, “Turnitin Systems: A Deterrent to Plagiarism in College Classrooms,” Journal of Research on Technology in Education, March 6, 2013; “Why Students Cheat, and What To Do About It,” Hult Labs, February 9, 2013; D. McCabe, “MBAs Cheat. But Why?” Harvard Business Review blog, April 13, 2009; www.turnitin.com, www.iparadigms.com, www.plagtracker.com, accessed March 30, 2015.

## Questions:
1. As the Turnitin database expands rapidly by incorporating a growing number of papers and essays, what will be the impact on subsequent papers submitted to it?

2. Discuss the ethical implications of writing a paper yourself that you know contains some plagiarized material and then using Turnitin’s service yourself.
